https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=1126
research
Fluid Shifts Before, During and After Prolonged Space Flight and Their Association with Intracranial Pressure and Visual Impairment
*
	More than half of American astronauts experience vision changes and anatomical alterations to parts of their eyes during and after long-duration space flight. It is hypothesized that the headward fluid shift that occurs during space flight leads to increased pressure in the brain, which may push on the back of the eye, causing it to change shape. The Fluid Shifts Before, During, and After Prolonged Space Flight and Their Association with Intracranial Pressure and Visual Impairment (Fluid Shifts) investigation measures how much fluid shifts from the lower body to the upper body, in or out of cells and blood vessels, and determines the impact these shifts have on fluid pressure in the head, changes in vision and eye structures.
Detailed Research Description
	More than half of American astronauts have developed ocular structural or functional changes during or after long duration space flight on the International Space Station (ISS). Findings have includedoptic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, dilation of the optic nerve, as well as imaging signs and lumbar puncture data indicative of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). This pattern is referred to as the Spaceflight Associated Neuro-ocular Syndrome (SANS, formerly the visual impairment and intracranial pressure, or VIIP, syndrome). While short duration space flight is also characterized by vision disturbances, these are generally transient and do not appear to have lasting impacts on the structure or function of the eye. Changes in vision, eye and adnexa morphology, are hypothesized to be the result of space flight-induced cephalad fluid shifts and elevated intracranial pressure. This hypothesis, however, has not been systematically tested. In earlier anecdotal publications, ICP elevation in long-duration space flight has been inferred, but without association with structural or functional changes of the eye. Furthermore, while fluid shifts and compartmentalization during short duration space flight (Space Shuttle missions) have been studied, the fluid distribution patterns and their effects on intracranial pressure or the structure and function of the sensory organs in the course of long-duration space flight are not well known.



	The purpose of this study is to characterize fluid distribution and compartmentalization associated with long-duration space flight, and to correlate these findings with vision changes and other elements of the SANS syndrome. The investigators also seek to determine whether the magnitude of fluid shifts during space flight, as well as the SANS-related effects of those shifts, is predicted by the crewmember&rsquo;s preflight conditions and responses to acute hemodynamic manipulations (such as head-down tilt). Lastly, the patterns of fluid distribution in ISS astronauts during acute reversal of fluid shifts are evaluated through application of lower body negative pressure (LBNP) interventions to characterize and explain general and individual responses.



	This experiment examines a variety of physiologic variables in 13 long-duration ISS crewmembers before, during and after long duration space flight. Measures include: (1) fluid compartmentalization (total body water by 2H2O, extracellular fluid by NaBr, intracellular fluid by calculation, plasma volume by CO rebreathe, interstitial fluid by calculation); (2) forehead/eyelids, tibia, calcaneus tissue thickness (by ultrasound); (3) vascular dimensions by ultrasound (jugular veins, cerebral and carotid arteries, vertebral arteries and veins, portal vein) and venous pressure using a VeinPress during ultrasound; (4) vascular dynamics by MRI (head/neck blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid pulsatility); (5) ocular measures (optical coherence tomography, intraocular pressure, 2-dimensional ultrasound including optic nerve sheath diameter, globe flattening, and retina-choroid thickness, Doppler ultrasound of ophthalmic and retinal arteries, and veins); (6) cardiac variables by ultrasound (inferior vena cava, tricuspid flow and tissue Doppler, pulmonic valve, stroke volume, right heart dimensions and function, four-chamber views); and (7) ICP measures (tympanic membrane displacement, distortion-product otoacoustic emissions, and optic nerve sheath diameter). On the ground, acute head-down tilt induces cephalad fluid shifts, whereas LBNP opposes these shifts. Controlled Mueller maneuvers are used to manipulate cardiovascular variables. Through interventions applied before, during, and after flight, the relationship between fluid shifts and the SANS syndrome can be fully evaluated.

BriefResearchOperations
	Two in-flight sessions are planned: one at FD45, and one at R-45. An additional session (at FD150)is performed for mission durations of one-year. Each FD session encompasses four days of testing: Day 1 dilution measures, Day 2 baseline imaging measures, and Day 3-4 imaging measures with Chibis. Dilution measures include 2H2Oand NaBr ingestion and corresponding blood, urine, and saliva collections. Imaging measures include Cerebral and Cochlear Fluid Pressure (CCFP), Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emissions (DPOAE), Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), Intraocular Pressure (IOP), Blood Pressure (BP), and ultrasound of multiple physiological sites.

Space Applications
	Fluid Shifts investigates the causes for severe and lasting physical changes to astronaut's eyes. Because the headward fluid shift is a hypothesized contributor to these changes, reversing this fluid shift with a lower body negative pressure device is beinginvestigated as a possible intervention. Results from this study may help to develop preventative measures against lasting changes in vision and eye damage.

Earth Applications
	Results from the Fluid Shifts investigation are expected to improve scientists' understanding of how blood pressure in the brain affects eye shape and vision, which could also benefit people confined to long-term bed rest, or suffering from disease states that increase swelling and pressure in the brain.
