https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=830
research
Assessment of Operator Proficiency Following Long-Duration Space Flight
*
Lack of gravity causes sensorimotor deficits post-landing. This experiment's comprehensive cognitive/sensorimotor test battery will determine the relative contribution of specific mechanisms (including sleepiness and fatigue) underlying decrements in post-flight operator proficiency. These results will be critical in determining whether sensorimotor countermeasures are required for piloted landings and early surface operations, and what functional areas countermeasures should target.
Detailed Research Description
	Long-term exposure to microgravity has the potential to negatively impact the ability of crew members to operate complex machinery and perform post-landing EVA. This project directly addresses the 'risk of impaired ability to maintain control of vehicles and other complex systems' identified by NASA's Human Research Program by performing pre- and post-flight assessments of sensorimotor function in ISS astronauts in conjunction with full-motion simulations to gauge the effects of microgravity exposure on operator proficiency.

	The PI team developed a full-motion simulator based on a 6 degree-of-freedom Stewart platform. The single seat cabin utilizes triple scene projection covering 150&deg; horizontal by 50&deg; vertical. Subjects are placed in a racing seat and restrained by a 4-point harness. The control pod includes a steering wheel and joystick, and three pedals (outer pedals used for rudder input during flight; right and middle pedal used for accelerator and brake for driving simulations).

	Based on a review of relevant in- and post-flight studies, the PI team developed a battery of tests to be performed on seated ISS crew members pre- and post-flight. The test battery targets cognitive, oculomotor, fine motor, and vestibular mechanisms potentially underlying post-flight deficits in operator performance. In addition, subjective and objective measures of sleepiness and fatigue will be obtained to control for the cumulative effects of in-flight sleep deprivation and workload on post-flight sensorimotor and operator function. The results from these test batteries will be correlated with astronaut performance on three operationally-relevant full-motion simulator tasks: control of an automobile, operation of a Mars rover, and (for experienced pilot subjects only) T-38A Talon landing simulations.

	The aim is to objectively define the effects of long-duration spaceflight on operator proficiency, and identify microgravity-related sensorimotor or cognitive deficits (or combinations thereof) underlying degradation of operator effectiveness. This study will answer four critical questions:
1. To what degree does long-duration spaceflight impair a crew member&rsquo;s ability to operate a vehicle or other machinery?

2. What sensorimotor/cognitive functions underlie degradation of operator proficiency?

3. Are sensorimotor countermeasures required for lunar/Martian landings and surface operations?

4. If so, what areas should these countermeasures target?
BriefResearchOperations 	After an introductory 30 minute overview (first session only), the crew member enters the 6 degree of freedom motion simulator to conduct the following tasks over a 60 minute period:

1) Sensorimotor Test Battery
2) Driving Simulation
3) Flight Simulation
4) Rover Simulation

Four sessionsare conducted prior to flight in the L-120 days to launch timeframe and three sessions are performed after landing (R+0/1, R+4, and R+8 days).
Space Applications
	An understanding of the underlying mechanisms for the decrement in post-flight proficiency will help determine whether countermeasures are required for future exploration class missions, and what functional areas the countermeasures should target.
Earth Applications
	N/A