https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=162
research
A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA
*
EVA Radiation Monitoring: A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVARM) characterized the radiation doses experienced by crewmembers during extravehicular (spacewalk) activities. The data determined which parts of the human body are exposed to the highest radiation levels so that routine dosage monitoring in future missions can be done on the appropriate parts of the human body.
Detailed Research Description 	A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVA radiation monitoring (EVARM)) was designed to quantify the radiological dose received by astronauts while performing EVAs at the ISS. Extravehicular mobility units (EMUs, or spacesuits), worn by spacewalking astronauts, provide less shielding from radiation than the spacecraft. This means that
spacewalkers are exposed to higher radiation levels during EVAs than at other times on orbit. When planning EVAs, teams take into account mission
parameters, estimated duration, ISS altitude and inclination plus information on space weather conditions (e.g., solar activity, geomagnetic field conditions, proton flux) anticipated for that day. In addition to specific lifetime radiation limits, medical standards specify that radiation doses achieved by astronauts should be as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). To create new and improved shielding for EVAs, researchers must know the type and flux of radiation inside the EMU. EVARM investigates the dose received by different parts of the body (skin, eyes, blood-forming organs) during an EVA by measuring dose rate, based on the time and position of EVAs as compared to the orbit, altitude, and attitude of the ISS.As part of EVARM, spacewalkers wore dosimeters placed in small pockets along the EMU undergarments. Two dosimeters were placed either inside the thermal comfort undergarment or the liquid-cooled ventilation garment, one dosimeter was placed around the calf to measure absorbed dose to skin, and another dosimeter was worn above the eye inside the communications carrier assembly. EVARM used tiny metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET) dosimeters, a 0.04-in2 silicon chip placed on a badge made of aluminum. When an MOSFET is exposed to ionizing radiation, a positive charge builds up on the silicon surface, creating a negative shift in threshold voltage. Measurements were taken by comparing the change in threshold voltage with the radiation dose, which was recorded using a photodiode. New dosimeters were worn by the crew during each EVA.
BriefResearchOperations 	Crewmembers will wear three active dosimeter badges during EVA activities (on the leg, torso and near the eye). Badges were read pre- and post EVAs with the electronic reader.The data was downlinked into a file in the Human Research Facility - 1 (HRF-1) computer after EVA activities with the data downlinked to the ground once per week.
Space Applications 	A complete understanding of the space radiation environment and the potential radiation doses astronauts receive on various parts of their bodies allows space agencies worldwide to plan mission activities such as EVAs, with crew long-term health in mind. EVARM and other space radiation research provide the data necessary to create models and issue recommendations for space radiation protection.
Earth Applications 	Shielding and countermeasures developed for the space program can also be used on Earth to protect people who work in high-radiation areas.
PreviousMissions
	Experiments using MOSFET, a Russian dosimeter similar to EVARM, were conducted in the 1990s on the Russian biosatellites BION-10 and BION-11 as well as on Mir.