https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=264
research
Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes of Astronauts-1
*
SCIENCE OBJECTIVES FOR EVERYONE
Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes of Astronauts-1 (Chromosome-1) studies space radiation on humans. The expected results will provide a better knowledge of the genetic risk of astronauts in space and can help to optimize radiation shielding.

SCIENCE RESULTS FOR EVERYONE
Chromosome-1 is a long-term investigation of chromosomal damage, an indicator of radiation exposure, in astronauts’ blood lymphocytes on long and short-duration space missions. Results show significant change mainly in only one type of chromosomal damage after long-term flight, with subsequent missions appearing to lead to fewer chromosomal alterations. Further study is needed to determine the mechanism for this adaptation. Other studies found no correlation between chromosome damage and duration or number of flights or extra-vehicular activity.   Basic research into how radiation affect cells and tissue can lead to better  countermeasure, such as spacecraft shielding or protective drugs.
RESEARCH OVERVIEW
This study will assess changes in the morphology of chromosomes, particularly chromosomal aberrations. The frequency and the type of chromosomal aberrations depend on characteristics and doses of ionizing radiation the crewmembers are exposed to while in orbit.


Chromosomes collected from blood lymphocytes are scored for different types of abnormalities before and after a stay on ISS. Some of the analysis methods are new, and will provide a new way of visualizing all changes, particularly those increasing the risk of cancer.
DESCRIPTION
Crewmembers are exposed to radiation when they leave the protection of Earth's atmosphere. Ionizing radiation in particular can damage chromosomes, causing mutations such as chromosome aberrations. To assess the genetic impact of this radiation, blood is drawn before and immediately after flight by venous puncture. The blood is then cultured and the lymphocytes are stimulated to undergo mitosis (the process of cell division). In the first mitosis, at about 48 hours of incubation, the process is stopped and the chromosomes are prepared and stained using three different methods of microscopic analysis to assess all types of aberrations induced by ionizing radiations. These methods are:

Classic Giesma staining, which allows the researcher to investigate changes in the morphology of the chromosomes. Chromosomes have a natural x-shape. Structural changes detected using Giesma include dicentric (the two chromatids of each chromosome are attached twice) and ring chromosomes or fragments (chromosome pieces without a centromere).


Multicolor Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (mFISH), which scores reciprocal translocations and insertions (exchange of parts between different chromosomes).


Multicolor Banding Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (mBAND) of the selected chromosome pair 5, which scores for inversions and translocations between homologous chromosomes (exchange or relocation of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) parts within the same chromosome pair).
A quantitative comparison between preflight and postflight aberration values will give information about the chromosome-breaking effects of cosmic radiation in blood lymphocytes of space travelers. Information will be generated concerning the participation of each chromosome pair in aberration formation as well as the interchromosomal and intrachromosomal distribution of different aberration types. The association of chromosomal aberrations with an enhanced cancer risk stresses the importance of the planned research.
SPACE APPLICATIONS
From this study scientists may be able to better assess risk factors for genetic damage in space and help develop new methods for protecting crewmembers. Understanding and reducing the risk of radiation is important for safe long duration travel in space, including stays on the Moon and travel to Mars.

EARTH APPLICATIONS
The knowledge gained from this investigation will give scientist's insight into the exact chromosome from which particular mutations arise.