https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=641
research
Cardiac Atrophy and Diastolic Dysfunction During and After Long Duration Spaceflight: Functional Consequences for Orthostatic Intolerance, Exercise Capability and Risk for Cardiac Arrhythmias
*
Cardiac Atrophy and Diastolic Dysfunction During and After Long Duration Spaceflight: Functional Consequences for Orthostatic Intolerance, Exercise Capability and Risk for Cardiac Arrhythmias (Integrated Cardiovascular) aims to quantify the extent, time course and clinical significance of cardiac atrophy (decrease in the size of the heart muscle) associated with long-duration space flight and identify the mechanisms of this atrophy and the functional consequences for crewmembers who spend extended periods of time in space.
Detailed Research Description
	Cardiac atrophy (a decrease in the size of the heart muscle) appears to develop during space flight or its ground-based analogues leading to diastolic dysfunction (abnormal left ventricular function in the heart) and orthostatic hypotension (drop in blood pressure upon standing). Such atrophy may have been a potential mechanism for the cardiac arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms) identified in some crewmembers after long-duration exposure to microgravity aboard the Mir Space Station. Recent studies suggest that cardiac atrophy may be progressive, without a clear plateau over at least 12 weeks of bedrest, and thus may be a significant limiting factor for extended duration space exploration missions. This experiment aims to quantify the extent, time course and clinical significance of cardiac atrophy and identify its mechanisms. The functional consequences of this atrophy are also determined for cardiac filling dynamics, orthostatic tolerance under both normal gravity (Earth) and fractional gravity (Mars and moon) conditions, exercise tolerance, and arrhythmia susceptibility both in space on board the International Space Station (ISS) and following return to Earth.

	The Integrated Cardiovascular experiment investigates the magnitude of left and right ventricular atrophy associated with long-duration space flight (using magnetic resonance imaging or MRI), relates this type of atrophy to measures of physical activity and cardiac work inflight, and determines the time course and pattern of the progression of cardiac atrophy inflight using cardiac ultrasound. This investigation also determines the functional importance of cardiac atrophy for cardiac diastolic function and the regulation of stroke volume (volume of blood pumped by the heart in one contraction) during gravitational transitions, as well as identifies changes in ventricular conduction, depolarization and repolarization during and after long-duration space flight, and relates these factors to changes in heart mass and morphology (shape and form).
BriefResearchOperations


			Inflight operations include the following:



					Resting echocardiograms (using the Human Research Facility or HRF Ultrasound 2) are performed periodically during flight (number depending on flight duration).



					An exercise echo session (with echo measurements both before and during or after exercise) is also performed one time during the increment (twice for mission durations of one year).



					Ambulatory blood pressure recording for 24 hours, along with Holter and activity monitoring for 48 hours occurs either before or after each echo session (resting and exercise).



					Download and downlink of data from all experiment hardware to the HRF Personal Computer (PC) occurs following the completion of each set of echo/ambulatory monitoring sessions.



					Logs of in-flight exercise and medication are obtained through data sharing with other activities.





			Preflight and postflight operations include the following:



					Resting echocardiograms are performed before and after flight.



					Exercise echocardiograms are also performed once before and twice after flight.



					48-hour ambulatory monitoring (24 hours for blood pressure, 48 hours for Holter and activity monitoring) occurs twice before flight and once after landing.



					A cardiac MRI (with Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and gadolinium delayed enhancement) is obtained once before and twice after flight.



					A graded tilt test with echocardiogram is performed once before and once after flight.



					Exercise and medication logs are obtained, preferably via data sharing with other activities.






Space Applications
	Once the magnitude, time course, and inciting factors for cardiac atrophy are determined, effective countermeasures currently being developed by the investigators in parallel ground-based experiments may be applied, focused on normalizing cardiac work and volume during long-duration space flight. Upon completion of these experiments, a number of important risks for long-duration space flight, such as cardiac function and arrhythmia risk, may either be deemed manageable by current preventive measures, or clearly defined for future countermeasure research.
Earth Applications
	The information obtained from these space flight experiments has relevance for patients after prolonged confinement to bedrest, or chronic reduction in physical activity, as well as for patients with disease processes that alter cardiac stiffness such as congestive heart failure, ischemic heart disease, and normal ageing.
PreviousMissions
	Integrated Cardiovascular began operations during ISS Expedition 19/20. The investigators also have extensive previous experience with cardiovascular investigations performed on Space Shuttle and Mir.
EducationalActivities
OPNOM 	Integrated Cardiovascular
Title 	Cardiac Atrophy and Diastolic Dysfunction During and After Long Duration Spaceflight: Functional Consequences for Orthostatic Intolerance, Exercise Capability and Risk for Cardiac Arrhythmias
StudentReflection
ResultsSummary
	Perhaps the Grinch was an extraterrestrial since the size of heart muscle decreases in space. The Integrated Cardiovascular investigation sought to measure this decrease and its effects on health, in an effort to find out how this happens and how it affects crew members functioning. Data are being collected and analyzed in order to develope effective ways to maintain a strong heart for long-duration space missions.