https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/news/oct_wrap_up
article
Think it Over: Scientists Ponder the Brain in Space
10-29-2015
There has been a great deal of thought behind brain research aboard the International Space Station in October. Researchers are studying the brain in space to see how spaceflight impacts astronauts’ central nervous systems. As the scientists collect their data in microgravity, NASA will create countermeasures to help reduce risks during future long-duration missions. These results can also help in understanding how the brain works when challenged on Earth.
To recap, we reflected on the following “brain in space” investigations this month:
NeuroMapping: A study of how spaceflight changes the brain structure and function, including motor control and visualization. This is measured using structural and functional magnetic resonance brain imaging (MRI) pre-flight and after crew members return to the ground. Scientists hope to adapt this study’s findings across a range of brain adaptation causes on Earth, including aging, chemotherapy, injury and illness.
Cognition: A set of tests that measure how spaceflight-related physical changes, such as microgravity and lack of sleep, affect the function of the brain. The 10 computerized tests cover a wide range of cognitive functions and provide real-time feedback. The tests could be administered to other professionals who may suffer from fatigue or other mental stressors, such as medical doctors, pilots, and even scientists in Antarctica.
Drain Brain: Researchers are trying to determine how blood flows from the brain down to the heart in the absence of gravity. With this understanding of blood flow in space, it is possible that researchers can help treat headaches and other neurological symptoms reported by crew members while living aboard the space station. A strain-gauge plethysmograph, a special neck collar used to measure blood flow from the brain for the study, does not require surgery or special knowledge to operate, making the collar potentially useful for monitoring patients on Earth who have heart or brain disorders.
Journals: Scientists make diary entries for this behavioral analysis of mood and psychological health when adjusting to isolation and confinement during long-duration space expeditions. Study results help NASA design equipment and procedures for future missions to the space station and the journey to Mars and also demonstrate that it is possible for people from different backgrounds and cultures to live in harmony, even under stressful conditions.
Habitability: This study collects observations on the living space of the crew aboard the space station. Design is important, since two crew members are currently living for a year aboard the station and this is their only living/work space. Researchers collect this information to help with future spacecraft design, which may also apply to design on Earth for those who live and work in confined spaces with limited volume and resources.
In addition to all of these brain-focused investigations, ponder the full set of studies designed for NASA astronaut Scott Kelly and Roscosmos cosmonaut Mikhail Kornienko as part of their One-Year Mission aboard the station. Scientists are examining the physical and psychological effects of isolation, fatigue, altered light-dark cycles in the astronauts’ waking hours and microgravity. Researchers will get a lot of human health data during this period which is twice as long as a typical U.S. mission.