https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=1125
experiment
Individualized Real-Time Neurocognitive Assessment Toolkit for Space Flight Fatigue
*
Individualized Real-Time Neurocognitive Assessment Toolkit for Space Flight Fatigue (Cognition) is a battery of tests that measure how spaceflight-related physical changes, such as microgravity and lack of sleep, can affect cognitive performance. Cognition includes ten brief computerized tests that cover a wide range of cognitive functions, and provides immediate feedback on current and past test results. The software allows for real-time measurement of cognitive performance while in space. Detailed Research Description Human exploration of space requires astronauts to maintain a high level of effective cognitive performance in the presence of a range of fatigue-related conditions associated with perturbations of sleep and circadian neurobiology, excessive cognitive and physical workloads (e.g., EVAs), and environmental stressors (e.g., CO2, hypoxia , radiation). It is unknown to what extend fatigue is a result of (or interacts with) other occult neurobehavioral risks in space flight (e.g., reports of cognitive space fog; symptom reports of neurasthenia (nervous exhaustion); visual field deficits from papilledema (edema of the optic disk) and/or the possibility of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) in space). Given the breadth of neurocognitive functions required for effective performance in space, the need to medically manage sleep and fatigue in space, the very limited neurocognitive assessment tools currently in space flight, and the often anecdotal nature of cognitive complaints from space flight, there is a critical need for rapid objective assessment of a range of neurocognitive performance functions in space flight. This project achieves this goal by developing a much-needed practical, yet comprehensive cognitive test battery; validating its sensitivity to fatigue and fatigue countermeasures; determining astronaut norms for the test battery; and establishing space-flight feasibility of the battery. The result is a software-based Neurocognitive Assessment Toolkit for Spaceflight (Cognition) that permits rapid, real-time measurement of astronaut cognitive performance across a much broader range of neurocognitive functions than can be currently assessed in space. Cognition Test Battery Description The Cognition battery is a 20-30 minute computerized test battery of cognitive tests. Besides a sleep questionnaire and brief subjective evaluations at the beginning, Cognition contains the following 10 tests (each test is mentioned with the primary cognitive domains covered): Motor Praxis (MPraxis): Sensory-motor ability Visual Object Learning (VOLT): Visual object learning and memory Fractal 2-Back (F2B): Attention and working memory Abstract Matching Task (AMT): Abstraction Line Orientation (LOT): Spatial orientation Emotion Recognition (ER): Emotion recognition Matrix Reasoning (MRsT): Abstract reasoning Digit Symbol Substitution (DSST): Complex scanning, visual tracking, attention Balloon Analog Risk (BART): Risk decision making Psychomotor Vigilance (PVT): Vigilant attention and psychomotor speed. BriefResearchOperations A minimum of 6 ISS crew members with mission durations of six months or one year are needed as subjects for this experiment. Cognition is completed four times pre-flight (at the familiarization, L-90, L-60 and L-10) and three times post-flight (at R+10, R+60 and R+90) on the subject&rsquo;s laptop. Each session is expected to take 30 minutes. For a mission duration of six months, Cognition will be completed 11 times in-flight at varied time points throughout the mission on the Human Research Facility Laptops. They will be completed weekly at the beginning of the mission then once every few weeks for the remainder of the mission. For a mission duration of one year, Cognition will be completed 11 times in-flight at varied time points throughout the mission on the Human Research Facility Laptops. The test battery will be completed on FD 6 and subsequent tests will be performed at 34 day intervals. Space Applications While living and working in orbit, astronauts must be able to perform complex tasks despite fatigue and stress. Cognition provides a way to test crew members&rsquo; cognitive performance by using a battery of tests. The experiment validates the sensitivity of the battery to fatigue and its effectiveness for use in space. Future missions could use Cognition software to measure crew members&rsquo; performance more effectively than current tests. Earth Applications Cognition includes a wide range of computerized cognitive tests, which could be used in a variety of situations on Earth. The tests could determine whether fatigue or other stress factors are compromising a person&rsquo;s ability to think and act clearly. The tests are brief and can be completed on a computer in virtually any setting.