https://srag.jsc.nasa.gov/SRAGFiles/Publications/COSPAR2002-ASJ.txt
research
Minimizing Space Radiation Exposure During Extra-Vehicular Activity
*
Continued assembly of the International Space Station (ISS) requires numerous Extra-Vehicular
Activities (EVAs).  Prudent radiological safety practices require minimizing additional
exposures to crewmen during these periods1.  The spatial distribution of the “normal” trapped
proton and electron radiation sources in low Earth orbit is strongly governed by the geomagnetic
field.  It is possible to use ISS trajectory information to estimate crew exposures during EVAs
and to identify periods that can result in minimal EVA crew exposures through avoidance of
these trapped radiation regions.  Such exposure minimization planning can also accommodate
the unforeseen development of a solar proton event.  An EVA exposure estimation tool,
EVADOSE, is described and applied to various EVA exposure scenarios.	Procedures and
parameters that influence EVA exposures are discussed along with techniques to minimize crew
exposures.
Astronauts are radiation workers.  Special exposure limits are applied that can allow astronauts
to receive exposures greater than that allowed for terrestrial radiation workers.  As a condition of
implementing the higher exposure limits, NASA is required to perform ALARA (As Low As
Reasonably Achievable) assessments to maintain crew exposures as low as reasonably possible.
The radiation fluences found in low Earth orbit are spatially non-uniform as a result of the
geomagnetic field which both protects and adds to the radiation environment.  On one hand, the
geomagnetic field provides some shielding against the background galactic cosmic radiation
(GCR), while on the other hand traps protons and electrons into regions where localized and
significantly increased radiation levels are found.  This non-uniform distribution of radiation
levels causes internal radiation levels to typically vary by a factor of 1000; the range of external
levels is even higher.  The crew exposure during an extra-vehicular activity (EVA), or space
walk, is very dependent upon the amount of time spent in the areas of higher radiation levels.
Assessing the spacecraft trajectory against the spatial distribution of the radiation environment
presents an opportunity to evaluate and make recommendations to potentially lower the EVA
exposure.
Figure 1 illustrates the basic distribution of the radiation environment at a typical ISS altitude.
Dose data from an internal radiation monitor, Tissue Equivalent Proportional Counter (TEPC), is
plotted against the spacecraft ground track.  This distribution is representative of the ‘normal’
radiation environment.  The tilt and offset of the geomagnetic field relative to the Earth’s spin
axis creates the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA), which appears as the “bulls-eye” over South
America. One third to half the daily dose is encountered in this region.  In this chart, the
remaining radiation is from GCR.  The lowest levels are encountered at the geomagnetic equator
due to the protection of the Earth’s field.  Geomagnetic protection decreases as the spacecraft
moves away from the equator.  Due to the tilt of the magnetic field, geomagnetic field lines with
large dipoles are found over North America and near Australia and provide little protection from
the free space environment.  These are referred to as ‘low cutoff zones’.  The yellow areas
indicate the GCR reaching maximum levels.  Although not measurable inside, trapped electron
belts dip to low Earth orbit (LEO) altitudes and are found near these low cutoff zones.  Thus, the
EVA ‘normal’ radiation hazards are summarized as 1) GCR, 2) SAA protons and electrons and
3) trapped belt electrons at high latitudes.  During off normal situations, additional exposure can
occur from Solar proton Events (SPE) or from temporary increases in trapped radiation belts
resulting transient magnetic storms.
In order to estimate the exposure to the crew the program called EVADOSE was developed to
assess the trajectory of the EVA spacewalker against the projected external radiation levels
encountered during the course of the EVA.  EVADOSE is designed to evaluate the difference in
exposure between what the crew receives during an EVA and what would have been received if
the crewmember remained inside the spacecraft.  GCR exposure inside or outside of the
spacecraft is very similar and therefore neglected in the analysis.  Trapped exposures, however,
differ greatly between inside and outside.  Transport of protons and electrons through the
spacecraft structure and the EVA Suit are evaluated using separate shield files to determine the
exposures inside the spacecraft and inside the EVA suit.
Four options for trajectory assessment are provided.
1.   Trajectory file – data file of latitude, longitude, altitude, B and L-Shell as a function
of time (once per minute).
2.   User-supplied State Vector – M50 state vector and associated time of vector to
generate a trajectory file.
3.   Real-time STS State Vector – current Shuttle state vector and time extracted by
polling local Mission Control data Servers to generate a trajectory file.
4.   Real-time ISS State Vector – current Space Station state vector and time extracted by
polling local Mission Control data Servers to generate a trajectory file.
The input trajectory file serves as an input source of B and L-shell computational routines in
conjunction with the source models to determine the flux at any location as a function of time.
AP8 & AE8 trapped proton and electron models are used with options to select from either the
solar maximum model or the solar minimum version of the trapped models.  The differential
proton & electron flux at each minute of the EVA is determined.  The differential fluxes are
summed for the duration of the EVA and used with two radiation transport codes, PDOSE for
protons and EDOSE for the electrons to compute the resulting dose.2   A summary output is
provided along with a proton and electron flux vs. time file for EVA exposure optimization.
Specific parameters may be input to produce an estimation of any particular EVA.  Generally,
before the EVA starts, several cases have been run to estimate the result of starting an EVA early
or late.  By combining the proton and electron flux versus time output files, a rolling integration
of a specific EVA duration is possible.  Figure 3 is an example of  EVA dose projections for a
high inclination Space Station mission.  The top half of the graphic depicts the dose rate vs. time.
These spikes are due to passes through the SAA or the electron belts.  Figure 4 depicts the result
from STS-109 a low inclination, high altitude flight which only passes through the SAA.
Planned EVAs are marked by green triangles.  For any given start time, the lower curve reflects
an estimate of the EVA exposure for the targeted duration.  In order to minimize exposures,
optimal EVA exposure start times should be scheduled in the bottom of ‘valleys’ of the lower
curve.  Once a day there is a time when the additional dose is at a minimum and it is possible to
receive very little extra exposure for the EVA.  However, EVA schedules are driven by a large
number of requirements so it is not always possible to schedule them for optimally minimum
exposure.
This type of temporal pattern of EVA exposure vs. EVA start time provides a quick means to
advise the mission control team on the impacts of changes in the planned EVA start time on
EVA exposures.  EVAs have been replanned on occasion based on similar analysis.  Although
the primary operational focus is on finding the minimum dose levels, the start times and
magnitude of the worst case exposures also can be determined.
The above method describes how, based on timing,  EVA exposures can be minimized.  It is also
possible to relate the dose at any given time to a ground track location.  The repeating structure
of the integral doses above reflects the repeating nature of the trajectory.  If the ground track
exactly repeated each day, the optimal exposure EVA start time would be the same time each
day.  Usually, there is a slight precession in the ground track leading to slightly earlier start times
each day.  Since each EVA start time has an associated trajectory location, it is also possible to
associate EVA doses with ground track locations.	Figure 5 depicts the ground track start
location of EVA below 30 mrem.  This information can also be used by planners to locate the
trajectory the position for optimal initiation of EVAs.  Generally, the optimum locations will
start as the spacecraft exits the last daily SAA pass. Such a trajectory will miss the SAA protons
and electrons and will be complete before the outer electron belts are encountered.  Starting an
EVA outside the optimum ground track shown in figure 5 will result in exposures greater than 30
mrem.
Solar proton events (SPE) can also contribute to an EVA exposure.  However, EVADOSE is not
configured with making dose projections based on SPE fluences.  However, when SPEs do
occur, the resulting protons intercept typical spacecraft altitudes in the low cut-off areas shown
in Figure 1.  These two regions also roughly correspond to the trapped electron belts.  An EVA
planned to miss the electron horns may also avoid SPE exposures.  To compare the relative
phasing of SPE exposures during a potential EVA, an SPE projection code2 was used to generate
6.5 hour EVA doses (See Figure 6).  A constant flux value approximately one fifth of the
maximum flux for the October 1989 event was used with quiet geomagnetic conditions to
generate the doses inside the vehicle.  Although the calculation is for internal doses, the relative
phasing will be the same EVA Exposures.  As can be seen in the figure, in a normal day there is
about an approximately 4 hour window that will result in a low EVA exposure.  A window of
time exists such that an EVA can be executed and receive little exposure, even during a large
SPE.	In this example a simulated very large event was used, resulting in a narrow window to
execute a 6.5 hour EVA at minimum exposure.  SPE events that are smaller may yield a wider
gap depending on many factors such as the magnetic field conditions (Kp), proton rise times, etc.
Due to the large variation in SPE events, these situations must be evaluated on a case by case
basis.  This case is provided to illustrate how EVADOSE can be used in conjunction with other
models and not necessarily to represent exact EVA doses from an SPE.   Shortening the planned
EVA duration will always increase width of the low dose window and lower the corresponding
EVA exposures at any given time.
EVADOSE is limited by the accuracy of the AP8 and AE8 models, the basis for estimating the
exposure levels from the trapped radiation.  While the accuracy of the trapped models introduces
errors in the absolute exposure magnitudes, the temporal location of the exposure minima which
results from spatial avoidance is fairly well defined and useful for ALARA planning.  Another
limitation resulting from the use of the AP8/AE8 models is that they represent long term static
averages.  In reality, changes in the geomagnetic field during storm conditions can cause
dramatic change in the low altitude spatial extent and intensity of the electron belts, but
generally, the optimal exposure trajectories will remain unchanged because the regions will
broaden.  Other methods can be used to adjust the dose projections during enhanced electron belt
conditions.
EVADOSE provides an easy method to assess potential EVA exposures.   This tool provides an
effective preflight assessment for EVA scheduling and may be used to guide EVA scheduling to
minimize crew exposures and meet ALARA guidelines.  Although the impacts of SPEs are not
included in EVADOSE’s capabilities and must be analyzed on a case basis, the results of
EVADOSE can be used in conjunction with other tools to evaluate these enhanced radiation
conditions.