https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/Investigation.html?#id=625
research
Bodies In the Space Environment: Relative Contributions of Internal and External Cues to Self - Orientation, During and After Zero Gravity Exposure
*
Bodies in the Space Environment: Relative Contributions of Internal and External Cues to Self-Orientation, During and After Zero Gravity Exposure (BISE) will evaluate adaptation to, the effect of, and recovery from long-duration microgravity exposure on the perception of orientation of ISS crewmembers.
Detailed Research Description 	The Bodies in the Space Environment: Relative Contributions of Internal and External Cues to Self-Orientation, During and After Zero Gravity Exposure (BISE) investigation involves having subjects view a computer screen through a cylinder that blocks all other visual information. The subjects will be presented with various background images containing different up and down orientations, on top of which they'll see a letter that could be either a "p" or a "d" depending on its orientation. Crewmembers will indicate which letter they see to determine the transition point at which they can't recognize the letter.This BISE test will enable the researchers to measure the relative importance of visual and body cues to the subjects’ perception of "up" and measure the influence of various cues and demonstrate which ones are the most important.  The scientists are also studying the process by which the brain combines multiple pieces of information about the same thing and produce the correct answer.BISE will conduct experiments during long-duration microgravity conditions on the International Space Station to better understand how humans first adapt to microgravity and then readapt to normal gravity conditions upon return to earth. BISE will also establish a relationship between different measures of orientation perception: OCHART, shape-from-shading and luminous line and whether these may be differently influenced preflight and postflight. Studies done in an aircraft that produce brief periods of microgravity suggest that, in the absence of gravity, people rely more on body cues than vision to tell them which way is up. This study will examine whether the same is true on the Space Station.  Scientists noted that the Station can be "tricky" because it contains different modules that are not all in a straight line. An astronaut in one module who perceives the floor to be where their feet are may become disoriented when they float into another module.  Crewmembers often go through a right angle to go between one module and another, therefore whatever corresponds to the ground in one module will not necessarily match in another module.  Scientist stated that these issues may also affect astronauts during spacewalks.  When the astronauts go outside of the spacecraft, they must adjust their orientation and use whatever visual cues they have.
BriefResearchOperations 	Astronauts will conduct two OCHART Protocol sessions, once at approximately flight day 10 and again approximately 2 weeks before return.Floating aligned with the laptop display; the crewmember will view the laptop screen through the Neurospat lightshield. On the laptop display, the crewmember will view a rotated character ("p" or "d") superimposed over a highly polarized visual background. The background will be presented in different orientations.Via the control pad, the subject will indicate if the shape is recognized as a "p" or a "d".
Space Applications 	Findings from the BISE experiment are expected to help to learn more about how astronauts perceive up and down in microgravity, thus creating a safer work environment in space.  BISE uses the space environment to improve the safety of space travel by designing countermeasures against specific problems.
Earth Applications 	Tools developed for the BISE experiment can also help people on Earth who experience balancing problems or are prone to falling, including seniors and people with conditions such as Parkinson’s disease.
PreviousMissions
	Increment 19/20 was the first mission for BISE.